# Single-cell atlas analysis to reveal fibroblast state transitions and immune landscape in BRCA1-mutant human breast tissue
## Introduction
A common mutation that occurs in cancer is the BRCA1 mutation and its role in the tumor microenvironment is poorly misunderstood. In breast cancer specifically, the BRCA1 mutation makes a patient extremely prone to breast cancer and recent research has found a prevalence of pre-CAFs (pre-cancer associated fibroblasts) in the stroma (Buechler et al. 2023). In terms of the immune infiltration, we see that BRCA1 wild-type patients experienced increased T-cell exhaustion and dendritic cell tolerance (Sun et. al 2025). But, we do not know if there are specific subtypes of T-cells or what other immune response (ie. mast cells, macrophages, etc.) are also involved. 

## Dataset
To investigate this further our lab in collaboration with a few others have created an integrated human breast atlas of healthy patients and various disease states. Each lab has done single-cell RNA sequencing on tissue samples and they have been integrated together using Seurat integration techniques. From the integrated data, we want to identify fibroblast cell states and specifically pre-CAFs and see how they differ between healthy and BRCA1 mutants and characterize the immune landscape and see the differences between BRCA1 mutants vs healthy. Additionally, we can run a pseudotime analysis to see at what point do we see a differentiation of fibroblasts from pre-CAF to cancerous fibroblasts based on markers once the cell state analysis is complete. This analysis will be broken down into 2 sections: 1) Fibroblast subclustering and 2) immune landscape classification. The dataset is publicly available here: https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/48259aa8-f168-4bf5-b797-af8e88da6637.

A large part of bioinformatics is analysis. Once the data has been processed using bash tools, we need to do downstream analysis. Understanding the tumor microenvironment through single-cell RNA-seq analysis is a key challenge in bioinformatics currently due to the diversity and sheer volume of data. Different factors in the tumor microenvironment play into the development of cells in terms of interactions and state transitions which is poorly understood on a global scale. Using an atlas study allows us to make more generalized conclusions. In terms of our class, this project would primarily be done in R which is a key language for the class. This project also involves many visualizations such as creating UMAPs, FeaturePlots, Volcano Plots, Dot Plots, Beeswarm plots and others. A key aspect of bioinformatics is clear visualizations that can show a reader unfamiliar to the project a visual tying in the analysis to the overall story. Additionally, a key part of bioinformatics is asking the right questions. As this analysis continues, I can add more things based on interesting findings and potentially create new questions to better characterize the microenvironment.

## Fibroblast Analysis
For the fibroblast subclustering, I plan to use Seurat to load the data and create a UMAP that accurately represents each of the cell types as its own cluster. Then I would isolate the fibroblast cluster and perform the similar Seurat pipeline filtering out ambient RNA, cells from other clusters and regions that may be driven by one patient or sample. We then would make a UMAP feature plot representation and heatmap for top 10 genes and create a volcano plot for the cluster to see what genes have the most difference between BRCA mutants and controls and try to identify fibroblast cell states. We then would identify pre–CAFs by using the markers from (Nee et al 2023). We would then answer the following questions from the subcluster: Do preCAFs activate markers of the DNA damage response? Do preCAFs activate markers of NF-kB and the NF-kB DDR axis? What cells are actively dividing? Do those correlate with high BRCA1 expression? Do those correlate with preCAF markers or stress markers such as DNA Damage response? We then will run a pseudotime analysis to see how fibroblasts might change in BRCA patients. This could possibly show how genes change state to state and which ones are more prominent in later stage BRCA patients. I plan to use Monocle to do the pseudotime which looks at how cells transition from one functional state to another. Monocle uses an algorithm to learn the sequence of gene expression changes each cell goes through during a dynamic biological process. Once learning a cell’s overall trajectory, the algorithm can place each cell at different points of the trajectory and we can look at genes regulated throughout the trajectory (Trapnell et al. 2014). From building the trajectory, I would be interested in seeing where pre-CAFs line up and the genes that regulate their transition, possibly to cancerous fibroblasts.

## Immune Landscape
For the immune landscape question, we will perform a similar analysis using the Macrophage, T-cell, Mast cells and if present Dendritic clusters. We will cluster each of them separately and perform a similar downstream analysis in which I will generate a UMAP for each and FeaturePlots to show marker genes. We want to use the subclustering analysis to answer the following questions: Do T cells express exhaustion markers in BRCA1 mutation carriers? MDSCs? Neutrophils? Macrophages etc? And what is their ISG/IFN expression in BRCA1 mutation carriers vs noncarriers? We also want to perform differential abundance of the subclusters showing how groups of cells exist in different conditions. This will be done using the MiloR framework which takes the processed single cell object and creates “neighborhoods” based on expression patterns which can include different cell types/clusters. This essentially would create a global map within the UMAP connecting clusters together (Dann et al. 2022). The result of this would be beeswarm plots showing the skewed distribution for different cell states. Using this we can see which specific neighborhoods are more differentially abundant in BRCA vs control. We can then do a DEG analysis on those neighborhoods and see what drives the abundance in each condition. 

## Conclusion/Feasibility
Due to the process for both cell types being similar, the analysis is pretty feasible for a final project. I have very specific ideas and past experience for what tools to use for different steps. Once I build the pipeline, I can run them conjunctly and possibly do Milo and Monocle for both depending on how good the results look. I plan to subset down to make analysis easier, possibly just using 10k cells from the samples and subset out cell types I'm not interested in. I have run analysis on similar sized datasets so this size is quite feasible. 

## References
Buechler MB, Fu W, Turley SJ. 2023. Healthy BRCA1/2 mutation carriers exhibit a pre-CAF signature and altered epithelial marker expression in breast tissue Scientific Reports 15(1):32736 doi:10.1038/s41598-025-18171-y

Dann, E., Henderson, N.C., Teichmann, S.A. et al. Differential abundance testing on single-cell data using k-nearest neighbor graphs. Nat Biotechnol 40, 245–253 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-01033-z

Nee, K., Ma, D., Nguyen, Q.H. et al. Preneoplastic stromal cells promote BRCA1-mediated breast tumorigenesis. Nat Genet 55, 595–606 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-023-01298-x

Trapnell C, Cacchiarelli D, Grimsby J, et al. 2014. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat Biotechnol 32:381–386. doi:10.1038/nbt.2859

Sun S, Chen S, Li K, Zhang G, Wang N, Xu Y, Wang X, Chi J, Li L and Sun Y (2025) Resolving tumor microenvironment heterogeneity to forecast immunotherapy response in triple-negative breast cancer through multi-scale analysis. Front. Oncol. 15:1538574. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1538574
